





Jean Baudrillard - Forget Foucault | PDF



















































































DocShare






Story & Novel

Literature

Exam

Comic

Religion & Spirituality



























English





Upload File

Sign in

















Jean Baudrillard - Forget Foucault


Home

›

Documents


›

Literature







 Jul 6, 2026


 16


 0




 Upload by 
Liam




A translated philosophical work originally published in 1977 as Oublier Foucault, presented in a Semiotext(e) Foreign Agents series context. The front matter records translation, copyright, publication and distribution details, contributors, and production credits. The contents include an introduction and interview by Sylvere Lotringer, with sections titled Exterminating Angel, Forget Foucault, and a postface, positioning the pamphlet as a direct challenge to Michel Foucault’s oeuvre and linking it to related Baudrillard texts.







Download




Save




0%




0%




Report






Language

English



Category

Literature



Format

PDF



Pages

118



Reading Time

3 h 2 min



Access

Free to download





Table of Contents



Introduction: Exterminating Angel


FORGET FOUCAULT


POSTFACE: FORGET BAUDRILLARD


An Interview with Sylvere Lotringer


Introduction to Forget Foucault








Content Preview





SEMIOTEXT(E) FOREIGN AGENTS SERIES  
Originally published in 1977 as Oublier Foucault, Edition Galilee, Paris. This translation first appeared as "Forgetting Foucault" in Humanities in Society, Volume 3, Number 1 and is reprinted by permission of the publisher.  
Copyright © 2007 Semiotext(e)  
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission of the publisher.  
Published by Semiotext(e)  
2007 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 427, Los Angeles, CA 90057  
[ww](ww.semlotexte.com)[.semlotexte.com](ww.semlotexte.com)  
"Forget Baudrillard" is translated by Phil Beitchman, Lee Hildreth, and Mark Polizzotti.  
Special thanks to Andrew Berardini, Christoph Cox, Jared Elms, Ronald Gottesman, Rahul Govind, Lewanne Jones, Christopher Mays, Nicholas Zurko and Joe Weiss.  
Cover Art by: Josephine Meckseper  
Untitled (Vitrine), 2005, Mixed media in display window, 116.8 x 116.8 x 47 em Courtesy of the artist and Elizabeth Dee, New York  
Back Cover Photography: Marine Baudrillard  
Design: Hedi El KhoIti  
ISBN-I0: 1-58435-041-5  
ISBN-13: 978-1-58435-041-5  
Distributed by The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. and London, England Printed in the United States of America  
Jean Baudrillard  
Introduction and Interview by Sylvere Lotringer  
Translated by Nicole Dufresne  

  
Contents  
Introduction: Exterminating Angel 7  
FORGET FOUCAULT 27  
POSTFACE: FORGET BAUDRILLARD 71  
An Interview with Sylvere Lotringer  
Sylvere Lotringer  
Exterminating Angel  
Introduction to Forget Foucault  
IN DECEMBER 1976 Jean Baudrillard sent a long review-essay of Michel Foucault's The Will to Knowledge, recently published in  
Paris, 1 to the prestigious French journal Critique founded by Georges Bataille. (Foucault was on the editorial board.) Its title,  
"Forget Foucault, " left little doubt about the author's intentions . It wasn't just a critique of the book, but a pamphlet challenging his entire oeuvre . The essay was never published in Critique. It came out instead, separately, as a book a few months later.  
Forget Foucault,2 to my mind, is by far the best introduction to Baudrillard's work. I intended to publish it among the first three books of the new "Foreign Agents" series, which started in 1983, but the attack on Foucault made it a bit problematic. Taking on a fellow philosopher publicly, let alone a philosopher of Foucault's stature, was something rare, and not only in France . Instead I published Baudrillard's Simulations, which became a best-seller of sorts, especially in the art world. Foucault's death one year later further delayed the publication of the pamphlet. It was finally  
1. Michel Foucault, History ofSexuality, 1: The Will to Knowledge [HS], tr. Robert Hurley, New York, Pantheon, (French, 1 976) 1980.  
2. Jean Baudrillard, Dublier Foucault, Paris, Galilee, 1977.  
released in English in 1987 with a double title: Forget Foucault/ Forget Baudrillard and a reversible cover, as if one cover could cancel the other out, making it less sacrilegious. "Forget Baudrillard" was a long dialogue I had with Baudrillard in 1984 , four years after we first met in Los Angeles and discussed the project . This series of mishaps and postponements both in France and in the United States, has a lot to do with the peculiar strategy Baudrillard inaugurated with this pamphlet.  
Baudrillard wrote it shortly after publishing Symbolic Exchange and Death,3 the most sweeping exposition of his main thesis until then. Few people realized how closely the two books were connected. Interestingly, Symbolic Exchange was released by Editions Gallimard in the same renowned series, Bibliotheque des Scienceshumaines [Library of the Human Sciences] as was Foucault's The  
Order ofThings.4 The two books, however, didn't elicit a compara  
ble reaction, or fire the same intense controversies. Actually Symbolic Exchange and







FAQs




What is the publication background of the book Forget Foucault?


Originally published in 1977 as Oublier Foucault, the translation first appeared in Humanities in Society and is later reprinted with permission by Semiotext(e).





Who provides the introduction and interview in this edition?


The introduction and interview are by Sylvère Lotringer, who also presents the context for why the pamphlet emerged and how it relates to Baudrillard’s strategy and other works.





How does the text describe the pamphlet’s relationship to Michel Foucault?


It frames Forget Foucault as more than a critique—intended as a public challenge to Foucault’s entire oeuvre, stemming from a review-essay that was later issued separately as a book.









Share with





Facebook




Twitter




Pinterest




LinkedIn




Email





Copy link






Jean Baudrillard - Forget Foucault


Home

›

Documents


›

Literature







 Jul 6, 2026


 16


 0




 Upload by 
Liam



Read Detail




 Download























Download






Bookmark






Share





Facebook




Twitter




Pinterest




LinkedIn




Email





Copy link








More Options





Like 0%




Dislike 0%




Report









Fullscreen







































Report Copyright

This document is user-generated content (UGC). WPS Office is not responsible for its accuracy or copyright. If you believe this content violates your rights, please use the 
Report
 button.









You May Also Like














The leading platform for sharing and discovering documents, templates, and presentations.



Company


About Us

User Agreement

Privacy Policy

Contact Us




Products


WPS Office for Windows

WPS Office for Mac

WPS Office for Linux

WPS Office for iOS

WPS Office for Android




Follow Us





















© 2026 DocShare by WPS Office. All rights reserved.




















